---
layout:     post
title:      Functional Approximations for MDP
subtitle:   Final Report in Course "Frontiers of Management Science"
date:       2024-07-03
author:     Wanyu Zhang
header-img: img/home-bg.jpg
catalog: 	 true
tags:
    - MDP
    - Revenue Management
---

> Adelman, Daniel. "Dynamic bid prices in revenue management." *Operations* *Research* 55.4 (2007): 647-661.

## Summary

### Background

This paper discusses about *approximation algorithms* for Markov Decision Process (MDP), particularly in the setting of revenue management. Consider a simple revenue management problem: At beginning, we have $m$ kinds of resources, whose capacity vector is represented by $c\in R^m$. There are totally $T$ periods. In each period $t$, a consumer with type $j$ arrives. The consumer requests for $A_j \in R^m$ resources and is willing to pay $f_j$. The decision maker need to decide accept or reject the customer. Here we consider *full information setting*, that is, the decision maker knows the exact arrival rate of each type of consumers. Let $p_{tj}$ denote the arrival rate of type $j$ consumer in period $t$. There is a trade-off in consuming resources immediately or reserving them to next-period. 

Obviously, this problem can be formelated as MDP. Let $v_t(r)$ denote the expected cost-to-go with resource $r$ in period $t$. Then the optimality equation is

$$
v_t(r)\max_{u}\{\sum_j p_{tj}[f_j u_j+v_{t+1}(r-A_j u_j)]+(1-\sum_j p_{tj})v_{t+1}(r)\}
$$

where $u_j$ is a binary variable representing whether to accept type $j$ consumer. The termination condition is given by $v_{T+1}(r)=0$. Also, the optimal policy is given by

$$
u_{tj}=\begin{cases}1,\quad \text{if}\quad r\geq A_j, f_j\geq v_{t+1}(r)-v_{t+1}(r-A_j)\\
0,\quad \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

This policy has an intuitive explanation, that is, accepting the request when immediate revenue exceeds opportunity cost of consuming resources. Here the value of resources are measured by value function (or bid price). To solve the value function, one could reformulate (1) into a linear programming problem:

$$
(D0)=\min_{v(\cdot)} v_1(c)\\
s.t. v_t(r)\geq \sum_j p_{tj}[f_j u_j+v_{t+1}(r-A_j u_j)]+(1-\sum_j p_{tj})v_{t+1}(r),\forall t,r,u
$$

However, the state space is exponentially large, resulting in high-dimensional variables and constraints. This makes problem (3) intractable and is known as the *curse of dimensionality*. To approximately solve this problem, tradional approaches ignores time dynamics and proposes static bid-price control. But this approach may result in loose approximation bound. This article is aimed at answering the following problem:

​					*Is there any tractable dynamic bid-price control algorithm?*

### Static Approximation

We first delve into the static bid-price control algorithm. Let $Y_j$ denote the expected number of class $j$ customers we plan to satisfy, then we have the following LP

$$
z_{LP}=\max_Y \sum_j f_j Y_j\\
\sum_j a_{ij} Y_j \leq c_i,\quad \forall i\\
0\leq Y_j \leq \sum_t p_{tj},\quad \forall j
$$

Let $V_i^*$ denote optimal dual prices with respect to the first line of constraint. Since this value does not change with time, this is also named as static bid-price. The static policy is to accept when $f_j \geq \sum_i a_{ij} V_i^*$. 

### Dynamic Approximation

Before stating the dynamic bid-price control formulation, we consider basic approximation problem. To solve the value function approximately, one approach is to use functional approximations. For example, value function can be approximated by $k$ basis functions

$$
v_t(r)\approx\sum_k V_{t k} \Phi_k(r)
$$

where $V_{t k}$ is the weight of $k$-th basis at period $t$. Therefore,  solving $v_t(r)$ reduces to solving $\{V_{tk}\}$. In this paper, the author choose $m$ basis functions, and set each function as $\Phi_i(r)=r_i$. Also, he incorporates affine functional approximation. Then, value function approximation is

$$
v_t(r)\approx \theta_t+\sum_i V_{t i} r_i
$$

Substituting $v_t(r)$ in problem (3) by (6), we can solve $\{V_{ti}\}$ by

$$
(D1) \quad \min_{\theta,V} \theta_1 + \sum_i V_{1,i}c_i\\
\theta_t-\theta_{t+1}+\sum_i (V_{ti} r_i-V_{t+1,i}(r_i-\sum_j p_{tj} a_{ij}u_j))\geq \sum_j p_{tj}f_j u_j,\forall t,r,u
$$

Here, we can interpret $V_{ti}$ as the marginal value of resource $i$ in period $t$, or dynamic bid-price. Then the dynamic policy is to accept when $f_j \geq \sum_i a_{ij} V_{t+1,i}$.

Comparing problem (3) and (7), we observe that (7) reduces the number of variables substantially. However, (7) still involves exponentially large number of constraints. Then the author proposes to use column generation algorithm to solve this problem. The procedure of the algorithm is: initially select a subset of constraints. Then computing the reduced cost of constraints and adding the constraint with largest reduced cost into subproblem. The procedure stops till convergence.

### Structural Properties

The first property states that the bid-price trajectory of each resource is monotonically decreasing. This is intuitive that when approaching termination, the marginal value of leaving resource to the next period is diminishing. 

The second propety is time-threshold policy. It means that for each type of consumers, there is a time-threshold $\sigma_j^*$ , such that the orders before $\sigma_j^*$ are all rejected and orders after $\sigma_j^*$ are accepted. One may recall that for single dimension secretary problem, the optimal policy is actually reject first $J$ requests, which is similar with this time-threshold policy. However, this conclusion does not hold in multi-dimensional scenario. And this suggests that this policy is not optimal. 

Finally, the author conduct numerical experiments and suggests that: 1. the proposed dynamic bid-price control algorithm is scalable when problem dimension increases. 2. dynamic algorithm has tighter approximation bounds and achieve higher revenue than static policy.

## Discussions

In this section, we discuss some variants of revenue management that relax some assumptions in this paper.

### Online Learning

This revenue management problem is also considered in many online learning applications. The main difference lies in the information avalability of consumer type distribution. The hindsight problem is

$$
\max_u \sum_{t=1}^T f_t u_t\\
\text{s.t.} \sum_{t=1}^T A_t u_t\leq c,\quad u_t\in\{0,1\}
$$

Under full information setting, the value (price) for each resource is pre-set. However, due to lack of consumer distribution, the prices in online learning algorithm are updated in each period. Specifically, consider the dual of (8)

$$
\min_p \sum_{t=1}^T \{f_t u_t + (\frac{c}{T}-A_tu_t)^T p\}
$$

Then the dual variables $p$ are interpreted as the price of resources. Consider online dual subgradient descent method, we update $p$ by

$$
p_{t+1}=p_t-\lambda_t(\frac{c}{T}-A_tu_t)
$$

The intuition behind this update rule is intuitive. First we set expected resource consumption as $\frac{c}{T}$, and $A_tu_t$ is the actual consumption amount. When actual consumption exceed expectation, we increase the prices. 

### Uncertain Horizon

In the paper, the author assumes exact information of selling horizon $T$. When $T$ is unknown, we can no longer apply original dynamic programming methods. Juxtapose this with a world in which viral trends are becoming ever more common, causing online advertising platforms, retailers and service providers to routinely experience traffic spikes. These spikes inject uncertainty into the system and make it difficult to accurately predict the total number of requests that will arrive. Moreover, it is usually difficult to predict these spikes, e.g. a news story breaks about COVID-travel bans being lifted, which results in a sudden and large uptick in the number of advertising opportunities for an airline.

Consider the fluid approximation (like (4)) under uncertain horizon. Assume we have access to horizon distribution, we can rewrite (4) as 

$$
\max_y \sum_t \sum_j Pr(T\geq t)f_j y_{jt}\\
\sum_t \sum_j Pr(T\geq t)a_{ij} y_{jt} \leq c_i,\quad \forall i\\
0\leq Y_j \leq \sum_t p_{tj},\quad \forall j
$$

However, this bound can be arbitrarily large as shown by Bai et. al, a tighter approximation is

$$
\max_y \sum_t \sum_j Pr(T\geq t)f_j y_{jt}\\
\sum_t \sum_j a_{ij} y_{jt} \leq c_i,\quad \forall i\\
0\leq Y_j \leq \sum_t p_{tj},\quad \forall j
$$

> Y. Bai, O. El Housni, B. Jin, P. Rusmevichientong, H. Topaloglu, and D. P. Williamson. Fluid approximations for revenue management under high-variance demand. Management Science, 2023.
